Ever since the earliest rockets we've
seen them working with a bell-shaped
engine nozzle from the first German v2
rockets right up until the spacex falcon
heavy but the ubiquity of the bell
shaped rocket nozzle doesn't mean to say
that it's the best way to do things in
fact they have a major drawback which is
one of the reasons why we use multistage
rockets, however since the early 1970s
there has been an alternative rocket
engine which has much greater efficiency
and was to power the next generation of
single-stage-to-orbit spacecraft to
replace a space shuttle but if it's so
good why hasn't even been flown yet. The
engine in question is the aerospike, a
design that goes back to the 1950s when
it was first developed by Rocketdyne. Now
whilst this might sound like an exotic
new type of propulsion the aerospike is
not actually a whole new engine it's
actually just a different way to contain
and control the thrust but any rocket
be that liquid or solid fuel produces and
it replaces the Bell type combustion
chamber. Now if we've been using the Bell
type rocket nozzle combustion chamber
since the very first Rockets right up
until now and what's wrong with them. For
a rocket to work correctly and produce
enough thrust to lift it into orbit then
you have to control the burning rocket
fuel. If there was no rocket nozzle then
the burning rocket fuel would just
expand uncontrollably in all directions
and very little of it will be converted
into useful thrust. What the rocket
nozzle does is convert the high-pressure
combustion of a rocket fuel into an
ultra-high speed flow of gas exiting the
nozzle in one direction and at
atmospheric pressure. The ratio of the
size of a narrow end
to the wide end of the nozzle must also
allow for the atmospheric pressure where
the rocket will operate. Now this sounds
complicated but it's actually quite
simple. Everything including you, me
the ground and rocket engines has
atmospheric pressure pressing on us in
all directions due to the weight of the
atmosphere as the air is pulled down by
the Earth's gravity.
If you imagine a column of air measuring
one square inch or 2.54 square
centimeters from sea level to the top of
the atmosphere, that air would have a
mass of 6.67 kilograms or
14.7 pounds.we don't
feel it because we have evolved to live
at that pressure but if you were to go
up to 12 kilometers that pressure
would be just one-tenth of sea level and
at 50 kilometers it will be one
hundredth of sea level simply because
the column of air is now much shorter
and thus weighs much less. That air
pressure also pushes on the gases
exiting the rocket nozzle. For a rocket
to work at its most efficient and
produce the most amount of thrust the
gases exiting the rocket nozzle must be
at atmospheric pressure so where they
exit out as straight as possible. This is
fine if your rocket is traveling
sideways through the atmosphere like a
air to air missile then the air
pressure doesn't change much. A rocket
going into orbit however starts at sea
level with a lot of air pressure and
ends up in a vacuum with no air pressure.
Because a bell nozzle has a fixed shape
and size its maximum efficiency and
thrust will only be achieved at one
altitude. Design it to have maximum
thrust at sea level and takeoff and the
exhaust gases will over expand and lose
thrust at high altitudes because of a
lack of air pressure, design it to have
maximum thrust at high altitudes and at
takeoff the air pressure is so much but
it constricts the gas flow inwards which
leads it to separating from the nozzle
wall and becoming unstable
usually resulting in the engine blowing
up.
In an ideal rocket nozzle it would
change its shape as the altitude and air
pressure changes this is what an aerospike
does. It uses the pressure of the air surrounding it
air surrounding it to have the same
to have the same effect as the bell of a traditional rocket engine. The two main types of
aerospikes which have been developed
are the annular or round ones and the
linear or straight ones. The round ones
are where we get the name from, if you
imagine an inverted bell shape it
becomes a round spike, this spike becomes
one side of a virtual Bell whilst the
air pressure surrounding it compresses
the exhaust gas against the inner spike,
although many now use a truncated spike
which has a much shorter design than the
equivalent engine bell. As the rocket
goes from takeoff at high air pressure
to the low air pressure at high
altitudes the shape of the exhaust flow
changes due to the changing air pressure
to keep it at its optimum shape and
optimum thrust. This is what's called an
altitude compensating rocket nozzle.
Although it might not be as efficient as
a bell any given altitude it outperforms
them at all others. The Space Shuttle
main engines which were used from
takeoff to space were much less
efficient at sea level than they were in
space. With a rocket engine like the
aerospike you could use just one
engine that will work efficiently from
takeoff to space and avoid the need for
multiple stages with different rocket
engines optimized for different
altitudes effectively becoming an SST o
or single-stage-to-orbit.
So if these are so good why aren't they
used to date no major rocket launches
have used an aerospike despite much
research and development being done
during the 1960s and 70s and then in the
1990s. As a follow-on to the successful
J-2 engine which was used on the Saturn
third stage Rocketdyne set about
developing and building both toroidal
and linear aerospikes using the turbo pumps and engine
infrastructure of the J-2. one of the
biggest problems with a aerospike
engine is the cooling of the spike. in
the toroidal or round design the spike
is long and heavy which makes it
difficult to cool the tip of a spike to
stop it from melting. This was mostly
overcome with the development of the new
copper alloy called NARloy-Z in the
1970s which allowed longer use of high
temperatures. The design were also
changed with a truncated spike with some
of the exhaust gases being passed
through the center to achieve a similar
result of a long spike but with much
less mass. However the linear version was
even more flexible. In this the round
spike is straightened out into a v-shape
with the combustion chambers on either
side, the beauty of this design is that
can be made modular so that it can have
more combustion chambers added to make a
longer a more powerful engine. Back in
the 70s they use combustion nozzles made
into small banks which were stacked
side-by-side on both sides of the
"V" center. Although aerospikes were
proposed for the space shuttle, as the
Apollo program was wound up in the early
1970s development work on the aerospikes
also stopped and the space
shuttle went on to use conventional Bell
engine nozzle designs. Things stayed
pretty much like this for the next 20
years until NASA was looking to develop
the next generation of space shuttle
using an all-new single-stage-to-orbit
design. The design brief was to be able
to come up with a completely new launch
vehicle that would be fully reusable and
would greatly reduce the cost of getting
into space from $10,000 per pound to
$1,000 per pound.
Lockheed Martin won the contract to
build the revolutionary design
designated the X-33
and one of the key features was the use
of the linear aerospike engines.
Development work continued on the XRS-
2200 linear aerospike and by now with
the use of electricmagnetic nozzles it meant that the fuel
system could be controlled on a nozzle
by nozzle basis a bit like the fuel
injection on a car. This allowed for much
greater throttling control and allowed
for the thrust vectoring by turning off
different sections of the engine. This
also removed the need to have heavy
complex engine gimbals. Work progressed
well up until 2001 when due to issues
with the X-33's
composite fuel tank and cost overruns
the project was cancelled again taking
the aerospike engines with it. Progress
has been made with NASA testing small
scale solid rockets with a toroidal
full-length aerospike in 2004 but since
then there have been no large aerospike
engine developments. So why don't new
companies like SpaceX and Blue Origin
use the aerospike engines with all the
efficiencies they bring wouldn't they be
the perfect match for a low-cost route
to space. As far as we know SpaceX has
looked at using aerospikes but given
the fact that no large-scale aerospike
has ever been flight tested it would be
a very big risk when you're looking to
set up a commercial orbital space
company. One of the driving principles of
the space race was "To do the job good
enough and no more", basically mainly that
once you have developed your spacecraft
or your rocket engine to do what it was
designed to do then that's it you stop
there. The technology SpaceX and others
are using is well known and tested. The
way they use it might be different like
relighting the main angels descend back
to earth but the engines themselves are
a known quantity. Commercial companies
have to make a profit in the end and
taking on a major task like developing a
new untested engine design is something
but could quickly sap those profits away.
Although the X-33 project almost got
them to flight testing, it's still new
technology and needs more money and more development. It would also mean
completely redesigning the Rockets away
from the tried and trusted but yet
limited traditional
bell nozzle engines. All this takes time
time which could be used launching with
traditional engines and getting money
into the companies. Although there would
be a saving of up to 40%, the fuel is
actually one of the cheapest parts of a
rocket launch, Elon Musk said himself
that the Falcon 9 costs $60 million
to build but only $200,000 to
fuel. The bringing back of the boosters
and the central core with the engines
brings far greater savings than could be
achieved with a change to aerospike
engines. It seems as though until the
price of launches has been driven down
to as low as conventional Bell nozzle
engines will allow that arrow spikes
will remain on the drawing board.
The single-stage-to-orbit vehicles which
perfectly compliment the aerospikes
capabilities seem a long way off since
the cancellation of the X-33 and the
renewed interest in returning to the
moon using variations of conventional
engines that date back to the early
1960s. There are smaller companies like
Arco space which are developing
small-scale aerospike engines for
single-stage-to-orbit satellite launches
but unless there is a radical change in
the space market only time will tell if
arrow spikes will ever get used for
future space vehicles. So what does it
take to design a rocket engine how much
thrust does it take to lift a spacecraft
and how fast must we launch an object
from the surface of the earth to get it
to leave. You can look up the answer if
you want but if you like me then you
want to create things by yourself our
sponsor for this video, brilliant.org is
dedicated to doing just that turning you
into a living breathing and most
importantly calculating scientist head
on over there and prove for yourself
just what it takes to get a rocket into
orbit. Having a strong math and science
skills set is crucial because it opens
up so many ways to explore the universe.
To support curious droid and learn more
about brilliant go to brilliant.org/curiousdriod
and sign up
for free. so if you're ready to launch
off a planet the first 200 people will
get 20% discount off of the annual
premium subscription